add "melange for x devs" section (#39)
melange-re/melange-re.github.io: docs/melange-for-x-developers.md

# Melange for X developers

If you are familiar with other languages, here you will find sections that
compare Melange to a few of them, so it might help you get up and running
quickly. In particular:

- JavaScript
- TypeScript
- Js_of_ocaml
- ReScript

## For JavaScript developers

Melange is a thin layer over [OCaml](https://ocaml.org/), a strongly typed
functional programming language with an emphasis on expressiveness and safety.
Melange’s goal is to help web developers build and maintain JavaScript
applications safely, thanks to OCaml expressive and powerful type system.

Melange allows to build applications using either OCaml syntax or Reason syntax.
If you don’t know which one to choose, we recommend

> [Reason](https://reasonml.github.io/en/), as it has been designed with

Author: Added ref in https://github.com/melange-re/documentation-site/pull/39/commits/fac0c88f58ed1d2ec8d371b8fecda63e963986bd.

[ts-pattern](https://github.com/gvergnaud/ts-pattern) as an alternative to the
lack of support for pattern matching in the language.

In OCaml, [algebraic data types
(ADTs)](https://cs3110.github.io/textbook/chapters/data/algebraic_data_types.html)
are a commonly used functionality of the language. They allow you to build your
own types from small blocks. And with [pattern
matching](https://ocaml.org/docs/data-types), it is easy to access this data.

### Nominal typing

In TypeScript, all typing is structural. This means that it is hard sometimes to
establish a boundary or separation between two types that have the same
implementation. For these cases, nominal typing can be emulated using tags:

```js
type Email = string & { readonly __tag: unique symbol };
type City = string & { readonly __tag: unique symbol };
```

In OCaml, nominal typing is fully supported. Some of the core language types
like [records and
variants](https://v2.ocaml.org/manual/coreexamples.html#s%3Atut-recvariants) are
nominal. This means that even if you declare exactly the same type twice,
functions that operate on values from one type will not be compatible with the
other type.

> There is also structural typing, used for OCaml

Reviewer: and modules.

Author: Not sure I understand, can you elaborate please?

### Immutability

TypeScript has two base primitives to work with immutability: `const` and
`readonly`.

The first one is used to prevent variable reference change.

```js
const a = 1;
a = 2; // Error: Cannot assign to 'a' because it is a constant.
```

And the second one is used to make properties immutable.

```js
type A = {
  readonly x: number;
}
const a: A = { x: 1 };
a.x = 12; // Error: Cannot assign to 'x' because it is a read-only property.
```

Nevertheless, there are some problems here. `const` and `readonly` only block
reference changes but do nothing about values. With `const a = [1, 2, 3]` or
`readonly x: number[]`, you can still change the contents of an array.

OCaml provides data types with immutability in mind, like lists, records, or
maps.

### Strictness and soundness

TypeScript you can use types like `any`, or other extensive types like
`Function`. This can be mitigated using the `strict` option in the
`tsconfig.json`. There is no such option in OCaml.

TypeScript may sacrifice soundness for practicality when needed, like mentioned
in [the
handbook](https://www.typescriptlang.org/docs/handbook/type-compatibility.html#a-note-on-soundness).

> OCaml implementations provide methods like `Obj.magic` but they are more

Reviewer: and the identity primitive, which we also documented.

Author: https://github.com/melange-re/melange-re.github.io/pull/39/commits/dde8ae32d450e5e5dff9c2837f6970ec7bf916d2

      </td>
    </tr>
  </tbody>
</table>

#### Immutability

<table>
  <thead>
    <tr>
      <th>TypeScript</th>
      <th>OCaml (Reason syntax)</th>
    </tr>
  </thead>
  <tbody>
    <tr>
      <td>
        <pre><code>const a = 1;
type A = { readonly x: number };
type ImmutableA = Readonly<A>;
const arr: ReadonlyArray<number> = [1, 2, 3];
type A = { readonly [x: string]: number };
</code></pre>
      </td>
      <td>Enabled by default</td>
    </tr>
  </tbody>
</table>

#### Currying

<table>
  <thead>
    <tr>
      <th>TypeScript</th>
      <th>OCaml (Reason syntax)</th>
    </tr>
  </thead>
  <tbody>
    <tr>
      <td>
        <pre><code>type addT = (_: number) => (_: number) => number;
const add: addT = (l) => (r) => l + r;
add(5)(3);
</code></pre>
      </td>
      <td>Enabled by default</td>
    </tr>
  </tbody>
</table>

#### Parametric polymorphism

| TypeScript                             | OCaml (Reason syntax)          |
| -------------------------------------- | ------------------------------ |
| `type length = <T>(_: T[]) => number;` | `let length: list('a) => int;` |

## For Js_of_ocaml developers

There are many similarities between Js_of_ocaml and Melange:

> - Both are available as libraries in the official opam repository.

Author: https://github.com/melange-re/documentation-site/pull/39/commits/fac0c88f58ed1d2ec8d371b8fecda63e963986bd

  server, Merlin, and the different editor extensions.
- Both have implemented extensive integration with Dune.

However, while Js_of_ocaml transforms OCaml bytecode into JavaScript, Melange
starts the conversion process earlier in the compiler pipeline, as it transforms
the compiler lambda representation into JavaScript.

Js_of_ocaml is a project with years of development and evolution behind it,
while Melange [appearance](rationale.md#a-bit-of-history) is relatively recent
in comparison.

These aspects translate into different trade-offs. Compared to Js_of_ocaml:

- Melange can be installed in an OCaml 5 opam switch, but the editor integration
  is not working at the time (May 2023).
- Similarly, any OCaml 5 features like effects are currently unsupported in
  Melange.
- Js_of_ocaml allows to compile the compiler itself and create "toplevels",
  which is not possible with Melange.
- `Marshal` is well supported in Js_of_ocaml, while Melange does not support it.
- Libraries like `Unix` or `Str` are available in Js_of_ocaml but not in
  Melange.
- Js_of_ocaml supports sourcemaps, which Melange do not support yet (as of May
  2023).

On the upside, in Melange:

> - Consuming existing JavaScript packages might a bit easier in Melange, thanks

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Consuming existing JavaScript packages might be a bit easier in Melange, thanks
```

  to its compilation model and the extensive availability of mechanisms to bind
  to JavaScript code.
- There is great support for some of the most used JavaScript libraries like
  [ReactJS](https://github.com/reasonml/reason-react/) or GraphQL clients.
- The generated JavaScript bundles are generally smaller.
- The generated JavaScript code is generally more readable.

> - Straight-forward integration with JavaScript tooling like Webpack, NextJS,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Straight-forward integration with modern JavaScript tooling like Webpack, NextJS,
```

  etc. This is possible thanks to the 1 module <-> 1 JavaScript file compilation
  model.

## For ReScript developers

> As a project that was born originally from ReScript, Melange inherits a lot of

Reviewer: ```suggestion
As a project that shares a common ancestry with ReScript, Melange inherits a lot of
```

its characteristics:

- The compilation model involves compiling a single module into a single
  JavaScript file.
- The libraries provided by ReScript (Belt and Js) are available in Melange too.
- The mechanisms provided for [communicating with JavaScript
  code](communicate-with-javascript.md) are mostly the same.

However, one of Melange’s goals is to maximize compatibility with the OCaml
ecosystem. This goal translates into fundamental differences in how Melange and
ReScript function from the perspective of both library authors and users.

### Package manager

ReScript projects rely exclusively on npm for all packages they depend on.
Melange projects, on the other hand, will use opam for native packages, and npm
for JavaScript ones. Melange package management is explained in detail in [the
dedicated section](package-management.md).

### Build system

While ReScript has its own build system, originally based on Ninja, Melange

> defers to Dune as orchestrator of builds, as is explained in detail in [the

Reviewer: ```suggestion
defers to Dune for build orchestration, as is explained in detail in [the
```

Author: https://github.com/melange-re/documentation-site/pull/39/commits/fbd10be37b0336e9d061a2774fc13146079d896c

corresponding section](build-system.md).

The divergences caused by switching the build system have a lot of implications
and nuances that are too complex to explain in this section, but some of the
specific details have been discussed in [the OCaml
forum](https://discuss.ocaml.org/t/ahrefs-is-now-built-with-melange/12107/3).

### Source-based vs pre-built distribution

While with ReScript every dependency can be downloaded with just npm, Melange
projects will have to use opam and npm. This is a trade-off: on one hand, some
Melange projects might need to include two package configuration files. But on
the other hand they can benefit from opam’s source-based package distribution
model for things like PPXs, linters, or any other OCaml tooling.

By comparison, to consume any OCaml ecosystem tool in ReScript is more

> challenging. As npm is a package manager designed for an interpreted language,

Reviewer: "there's no native toolchain available in rescript" should be mentioned somewhere. That's the actual limitation

Author: reworded in https://github.com/melange-re/documentation-site/pull/39/commits/dde8ae32d450e5e5dff9c2837f6970ec7bf916d2.

the specific details have been discussed in [the OCaml
forum](https://discuss.ocaml.org/t/ahrefs-is-now-built-with-melange/12107/3).

### Source-based vs pre-built distribution

While with ReScript every dependency can be downloaded with just npm, Melange
projects will have to use opam and npm. This is a trade-off: on one hand, some
Melange projects might need to include two package configuration files. But on
the other hand they can benefit from opam’s source-based package distribution
model for things like PPXs, linters, or any other OCaml tooling.

By comparison, to consume any OCaml ecosystem tool in ReScript is more
challenging. As npm is a package manager designed for an interpreted language,
package distribution requires including prebuilt binaries, which makes
maintenance harder for library authors, and might lead to issues for library
users if their architecture is not included in the prebuilt set of binaries.

### OCaml compiler version

ReScript is compatible with the 4.06 version of the OCaml compiler, while
Melange is compatible with the version 4.14 (as of May 2023).

The (Melange roadmap)[todo-fix-me.md] includes a milestone to upgrade to the

> latest version of the compiler 5.0.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
latest version of the compiler to the 5.x release line.
```

### Editor integration

Melange is fully compatible with the [OCaml platform editor
tools](https://ocaml.org/docs/up-and-running#configuring-your-editor), which
makes possible to work in projects that include OCaml and Melange code using the
same editor configuration.

ReScript has its [own set of editor
plugins](https://rescript-lang.org/docs/manual/latest/editor-plugins).

### Feature choice and alignment with OCaml

> ReScript goal is to model the language to bring it as close to JavaScript as

Reviewer: ```suggestion
ReScript's goal is to model the language to bring it as close to JavaScript as
```

possible. From the website [introduction
section](https://rescript-lang.org/docs/manual/latest/introduction):

> ReScript looks like JS, acts like JS, and compiles to the highest quality of
> clean, readable and performant JS (...)

New features added to ReScript might close its alignment with JavaScript, but
some of these features can lead to greater divergence from OCaml. As Melange
prioritizes compatibility with OCaml, it avoids incorporating those features
that widen the gap between the two.

Here is a non-exhaustive list of the features that ReScript has added and will
not be supported in Melange:

- The `async` / `await` syntax: similar functionality can be achieved in Melange
  through the usage of [binding
  operators](https://v2.ocaml.org/manual/bindingops.html) (introduced in OCaml
  4.13).
- Optional fields in records, like `type t = { x : int, @optional y : int }`.
- Uncurried by default.

The restriction above only applies to features that compromise compatibility
with OCaml, but otherwise Melange can incorporate bugfixes or new functionality
from ReScript.

> On the other hand, as Melange goal is to keep up with the version of the OCaml

Reviewer: We aren't in a position to make this statement.

Author: I agree. What do you think about https://github.com/melange-re/documentation-site/pull/39/commits/ae675c534e65567f187eb83b77ad6145735c165e?
